## Discussion

A surprisingly large portion of participants remember all of their passwords manually, I would have
expected more people to use password managers or even pen and paper (which was sadly not an explicit
alternative to the question) to remember their passwords.

Even though 78% remember their passwords by heart, only 43% find it difficult to keep track of them.
I did not expect these numbers to differ so much, what is it that allows such a large portion of
participants to remember their passwords with ease? Is it because they use the same password for
many things, that they just have a very good memory, that they are using some kind of system to
memorize them, or perhaps using real phrases as passwords?

More than half of the participants do **not** use secure passwords, this sounds very worrying to me.
That said, the specified definition of "generally using secure passwords" was very strictly
formulated in the question, which may have led to this number being higher than it should be.
Perhaps this question should have had more alternatives, or even have been divided into multiple
questions.

Since almost half of participants find it difficult to keep track of their passwords, I think it is
fair to say that there is not a right way to do it that is immediately obvious. If a person does not
wish to spend any time reflecting on how safe their passwords are, there is no simple right way to
do it - I believe this is a problem with the technology. For those who are willing to spend some
extra time on this, there are lots of alternatives to choose from, there are many different password
managers out there (1Password, LastPass, KeePass, Clipperz, to name a few) that all make this
easier, I have tried multiple alternatives myself, but I would not describe any of them as a simple
and obvious solution - I did have to spend some time both deciding on which was the right fit for
me, and then learning to use that tool. Indicated by how many people who finds it difficult today is
that I'm not alone in my struggle to solve this problem.

I think that this is a problem that not every single computer user should need to figure out on her
own. I've spent a lot of time figuring out my personal solution to this problem - way more time than
someone with little interest in computers would be willing to spend. There are other solutions to
this problem, such as using OAuth\[4\], email as authentication\[5\]\[10\], and it is not difficult
imagining other alternatives, such as sending out SMS messages with temporary codes or even using
voice recognition as authentication.

We, developers, no longer **need** to use passwords as our go to method of authentication, and it
makes the experience for our users more difficult than it needs to be. I think that this needs to
stop.

### Further studies

I'm not completely happy with the questions that I used in the survey, if I were to do it again I
would probably add "I don't know" as an option to some of the questions, and perhaps added a "I
write them down on paper" answer to the "How do you keep track of your passwords?" question.

The question I regret not adding the most is "How many different passwords do you use?". It would
have given a much better picture of the gap between how many accounts people have and how many of
them share the same passwords.

I would like to see numbers on how many people are aware of the existance of password managers but
choose not to use them, perhaps people find it difficult to use password managers or are not aware
of the possibility at all.

It would of course be nice to have a much larger number of participants to get better statistical
results, but it was not possible in the very limited time that this paper was written in.
